# Steps for ESW-201 test
This test is to understand the performance of gateway to check how many events can be sent through it without any loss/unacceptable latency.

Test setup:
* Machine 1 : Redis (event server)
* Machine 2 : Gateway server(metrics enabled)
* Machine 3,4: Used for publishers/subscribers depending on the scenario.
  

### Machine 1 setup:
* start location service and  event service
```bash
cs launch csw-services:<latest CSW SHA> -- start -e
```
**Note:**

Before starting location service remember to set the following environment variables:
* CLUSTER_SEEDS=<ip-address-machine-1>:5552
* INTERFACE_NAME
* TMT_LOG_HOME

### Machine 2 setup:
* start location-service 
```bash
cs launch location-server -- --clusterPort=5552
```

* start gateway server in auth disabled mode. Steps to be followed:
    1.  Clone esw repository.
    2.  Add `disabled = true` property setting in the `auth-config` of application.conf of the esw-gateway-server module.
```bash
sbt publishLocal
cs launch gateway-server:0.1.0-SNAPSHOT -- start -l true -c <path-to-command-roles.conf>
```  
  
### Machine 4 setup:
* start location-service 
```bash
cs launch location-server -- --clusterPort=5552
```

### Machine 3 setup:

* start location-service 
```bash
cs launch location-server -- --clusterPort=5552
```

##### Scenario(one-to-one) to test:
    20 publishers(& 20 subscribers) 500(128 byte) events per Second = 10000 events/sec

**Note:** The test is part of the csw-event-client/multi-jvm module hence we need to clone csw repository.

* Steps to be performed before running the test 
    
    1. Update the redis host and port in the application.conf(csw-event/csw-event-client/src/multi-jvm/resources/application.conf). 
    As 500 events per second need to be published `publish-frequency = 500` needs to be set in application.conf.

    2. As we want to use Machine 3 and Machine 4 for running publishers and subscribers we add following entries in the 
    multi-node-test.host file
        machine3-ip
        machine4-ip
        machine3-ip
        machine4-ip

    Since the scenario we run consists of 20 publishers and 20 subscribers, we will use 4 machines to distribute them.
    The above configuration ensures that first two machines are used for publishers and the last two for subscribers. 
    Since first and third entry in the configuration is the same ip address this ensures set of publishers, their 
    corresponding subscribers are on the same machine(for no issues in latency). By default, multi-node-test.host file 
    contains only one entry `localhost` i.e all the pub-sub pairs will be started on the local machine.  
   
    3. The number of jvms are also to be updated in `EventServicePerfTest.scala` . This can be done by setting the `totalNumberOfNodes`
     value and creating those many EventServicePerfTestMultiJvmNode classes. By default, the test contains `totalNumberOfNodes` set to 2 i.e
     there will be 2 jvms running on the local machine.
     
    4. The Scenario to be tested is to be added in Scenarios.scala file. We will be using one-to-one payload in this 
    test thus the following setting is added to `payloadOneToOne` scenario.
        ```bash
        TestSettings(
        testName = "tcs.size_128_100000_messages",
        totalTestMsgs = adjustedTotalMessages(100000),
        payloadSize = 128,
        publisherSubscriberPairs = 20,
        singlePublisher = false
        )
       ```
        This setting suggests that there will be 20 subscribers and 20 publishers with each publisher sending 100000 events 
         of size 128 bytes. Other scenario variations can also be carried out by making changes here.
    5.  Change the test setting from `ignore` to `test` in `EventServicePerfTest.scala` 

* start the test
1. If we are running multi-jvm test i.e all the pub-subs on one machine then use the following command.
```bash
csw-event-client/multi-jvm:testOnly csw.event.client.perf.event_service.EventServicePerfTest
```

1. If we are running multi-node test i.e all the pub-subs are distributed on multiple machines then
 use the following command. 
```bash
csw-event-client/multiNodeTestOnly csw.event.client.perf.event_service.EventServicePerfTest
```

